Rationale for Choosing PostgreSQL

Most of my experience with databases has been in Oracle (v. 6 - 11g). My experience with other database management systems has been limited to using MySQL for instruction in introductory database courses and PostgreSQL in CS 586 at PSU. I am interested in learning more about PostgreSQL, both for the sake of learning and for possible use in future courses I teach.

Also, when doing some research to identify database management systems to use for this project, I came across many online articles about Oracle vs. PostgreSQL. If so many people want to make comparisons between the two, I figure I should know more about PostgreSQL before I make any professions about the supremacy of one or the other.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
System Research about PostgeSQL

All work for this project was done on Windows 10 with PostgreSQL 11 installed on a machine with the following specifications:
 > Processor: Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-7200U @ 2.50GHz 2.70 GHz
 > Memory: 8 GB
 > System: 64-bit OS, x64-based processor


Join Algorithms

PostgreSQL has three join algorithms: nested loop, merge, and hash.


Indices

PostgreSQL has support for the following indices:
1) GIST (Generalized Search Tree) index - something of a framework for other indices, which can be adapted for use with many data types and in combination with other indicies.
2) SP-GIST (Space-partitioned Generalized Search Tree) index - used to partition space while searching spatial data.
3) Hash index - standard hash algorithm 
4) B-Tree index - standard b-tree algorithm 
5) BRIN (Block Range Index) index - used to store information about blocks of data
6) GIN (Generalized Inverted Index) index - used with arrays of data or multipartite data types, such as structures

The default index algorithm is the B-Tree. PostgreSQL does not support clustered indices.


Buffer Pool Structure & Size

The shared buffer pool is adjustible in size, with a default size of 128 MB. Its size is limited by the amount of available RAM and can be set to up to 40% of the size of memory.

Buffer pool slots are 8 KB in size.


Query Performance

During execution of a query in PostgreSQL, a number of statistics are gathered, which can be used to measure performance. To limit overhead during query execution, configuration of the postgresql.conf file allow for inclusion or exclusion of specific performance data collection. All of the statistic-gathering is accomplished by the PostgreSQL Statistics Collector, an internal subsystem that can track data about both disk block and individual rows.
